Editorial Pass on quic-manageability (#150)
quicwg/ops-drafts: draft-ietf-quic-manageability.md

mutable by the network, and is therefore integrity-protected. While less
information is visible to the network than for TCP, integrity protection can
also simplify troubleshooting, because none of the nodes on the network path
can modify the transport layer information.

This document provides guidance for network operations that manage QUIC
traffic. This includes guidance on how to interpret and utilize information that
is exposed by QUIC to the network, requirements and assumptions that the QUIC
design with respect to network treatment, and a description of how common
network management practices will be impacted by QUIC.

Since QUIC's wire image {{?WIRE-IMAGE=RFC8546}} is integrity protected and not
modifiable on path, in-network operations are not possible without terminating
the QUIC connection, for instance using a back-to-back proxy. Proxy operations
are not in scope for this document. QUIC proxies must be fully-fledged QUIC
endpoints, implementing the transport as defined in {{QUIC-TRANSPORT}} and
{{QUIC-TLS}}, proxy-relevant semantics for the application(s) running over QUIC
(e.g. HTTP/3 as defined in {{QUIC-HTTP}}), and have the TLS credentials to

> authenticate as the server and (in some cases) client.

Reviewer: Actually not sure here. The assumption wasn't necessary that the proxy can authenticate as the server (because then I guess it is the server) but probably rather that it would authenticate as an own entity offering a proxy service.

Author: "Transparent QUIC proxies"? You're right that if the client consents to a proxy (e.g. MASQUE) this isn't strictly true.

Reviewer: I think the problem is about the term proxy. For me the term mean only that there is some entity between the client and the server. The whole point of this section was rather to say that a QUIC proxy cannot be transparent in a sense that it can terminate a connection without anybody noticing. And yes, I do have masque in mind.

Reviewer: Ah now I see that you added the term "transparent QUIC proxy" in the text. Not sure if I want to coin that term here. Maybe we can just move the part about credentials into a separate sentence, e.g.:

```
A proxy can either explicit identify itself as providing a proxy service or may share the TLS credentials to
authenticate as the server and (in some cases) client acting as a front-facing instance for the offering service itself.
```

# Introduction

QUIC {{?QUIC-TRANSPORT=I-D.ietf-quic-transport}} is a new transport protocol
focusing on support of semantics as needed for HTTP
{{?QUIC-HTTP=I-D.ietf-quic-http}}.  QUIC is encapsulated in UDP and encrypted
by default. QUIC integrates TLS {{?QUIC-TLS=I-D.ietf-quic-tls}} to encrypt all
payload data and most control information. The version of HTTP that operates

> over QUIC is HTTP/3.

Reviewer 2: The two mentions of h3 here are disjoint.  Suggest moving the "semantics as needed for HTTP(/3)" later.

Reviewer: I would move only the reference to the quic-http draft. Because the first mention if https is the protocol in general, while later it specifically takes about h3.

practice, it describes what is and is not possible with the QUIC transport
protocol as defined.

# Features of the QUIC Wire Image {#sec-wire-image}

In this section, we discuss those aspects of the QUIC transport protocol that
have an impact on the design and operation of devices that forward QUIC packets.
Here, we are concerned primarily with the unencrypted part of QUIC's wire image
{{WIRE-IMAGE}}, which we define as the information available in the packet
header in each QUIC packet, and the dynamics of that information. Since QUIC is
a versioned protocol, the wire image of the header format can also change from
version to version. However, the field that identifies the QUIC version in some
packets, and the format of the Version Negotiation Packet, are both inspectable
and invariant {{?QUIC-INVARIANTS=I-D.ietf-quic-invariants}}.

This document describes version 1 of the QUIC protocol, whose wire image
is fully defined in {{QUIC-TRANSPORT}} and {{?QUIC-TLS}}. Features of the wire

>  image described herein may change in future versions of the protocol, except

Reviewer: ```suggestion
image described herein may change in future versions of the protocol, except
```
remove leading space...

In this section, we discuss those aspects of the QUIC transport protocol that
have an impact on the design and operation of devices that forward QUIC packets.
Here, we are concerned primarily with the unencrypted part of QUIC's wire image
{{WIRE-IMAGE}}, which we define as the information available in the packet
header in each QUIC packet, and the dynamics of that information. Since QUIC is
a versioned protocol, the wire image of the header format can also change from
version to version. However, the field that identifies the QUIC version in some
packets, and the format of the Version Negotiation Packet, are both inspectable
and invariant {{?QUIC-INVARIANTS=I-D.ietf-quic-invariants}}.

This document describes version 1 of the QUIC protocol, whose wire image
is fully defined in {{QUIC-TRANSPORT}} and {{?QUIC-TLS}}. Features of the wire
 image described herein may change in future versions of the protocol, except
when specified as an invariant {{QUIC-INVARIANTS}},
and cannot be used to identify QUIC as a protocol or
to infer the behavior of future versions of QUIC.

{{sec-google-version}} provides non-normative guidance on the identification of

> QUIC version 1 packets compared to pre-standard versions.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
QUIC version 1 packets compared to some pre-standard versions.
```

No mention there of Facebook's versions, for instance.

- "fixed bit": the second most significant bit of the first octet most QUIC
  packets of the current version is currently set to 1, for demultiplexing
  with other UDP-encapsulated protocols. Endpoints that do not need this

>   demultiplexing function might negotiate the use of arbitrary values.

Reviewer: Actually this new sentence does not seem right. The transport draft says:

```
   Fixed Bit:  The next bit (0x40) of byte 0 is set to 1.  Packets
      containing a zero value for this bit are not valid packets in this
      version and MUST be discarded.
```

Author: This is another warning about the grease, of course. I think it makes sense to include, but we have the other warning about grease in Section 3.1. I'll delete the sentence to move things along, because it's not a big deal.

Reviewer: section 3.1? I thought you actually can grease the fixed bit in QUICv1...?

Reviewer: Okay, actually I think it would be important here to note that this bit can/should not be used to identify QUIC (rather than talking specifically about greasing). How about saying something like: "Even though this bit is defined as fixed in the QUICv1 base spec, this bit is not invariant between versions or could even still be changed in an extension, therefore it can not be used an identifier for QUIC."

- "fixed bit": the second most significant bit of the first octet most QUIC
  packets of the current version is currently set to 1, for demultiplexing
  with other UDP-encapsulated protocols. Endpoints that do not need this
  demultiplexing function might assign arbitrary values. See

>   {{I-D.thomson-quic-bit-grease}} for more details.

Reviewer 2: Not sure if this is completely wise before it is adopted.  Of course, the statement will remain true nonetheless, even if that is never standardized.

Reviewer: Yes, I agree that we should not cite the draft here. However, we could say that the network cannot rely on this bit as the endpoint might decide to not support it (if not needed).

  Header Form and fixed bits. Header types correspond to stages of the
  handshake; see Section 17.2 of {{QUIC-TRANSPORT}} for details.

- version number: the version number is present in the long header, and

>   identifies the version used for that packet. Note that during Version

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  identifies the version used for that packet. During Version
```
```suggestion
  identifies the version used for that packet. Note that during Version
```

  Negotiation (see {{version}} and Section 17.2.1 of {{QUIC-TRANSPORT}}), the
  version number field has a special value (0x00000000) that identifies the
  packet as a Version Negotiation packet. QUIC versions that start with 0xff are
  IETF drafts. QUIC versions that start with 0x0000 are reserved for IETF

>   consensus documents. For example, QUIC version 1 uses version 0x00000001.

Reviewer: Are these convention still true? I guess we don't have that in the transport spec and therefore should probably also remove it here...?

Author: How about "Many QUIC versions that start with 0xff"?  This is a statement of fact, though you're right that in the future other stuff could be in this space.

Reviewer: Yep that's probably good to note!

  Header Form and fixed bits. Header types correspond to stages of the
  handshake; see Section 17.2 of {{QUIC-TRANSPORT}} for details.

- version number: the version number is present in the long header, and identifies
  the version used for that packet. Note that during Version Negotiation (see
  {{version}} and Section 17.2.1 of {{QUIC-TRANSPORT}}), the version number
  field has a special value (0x00000000) that identifies the packet as a Version
  Negotiation packet. QUIC versions that start with 0xff are IETF drafts. QUIC
  versions that start with 0x0000 are reserved for IETF consensus documents,

>   for example the QUIC version 1 is expected to use version 0x00000001. Operators

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  For example the QUIC version 1 uses version 0x00000001. Operators
```

If you are removing "QUIC is a moving target", then this will be the case.

Unless it isn't, but that will be a minor catastrophe that we can work through if it happens.

encrypted, there is no guarantee that a specific application will use the
registered port, or the used port is carrying traffic belonging to the

> respective registered service. For example, {{QUIC-TRANSPORT}} specifies

Reviewer 2: Alt-Svc use is defined in QUIC-HTTP:

```suggestion
respective registered service. For example, {{QUIC-HTTP}} specifies
```

> the use of Alt-Svc for discovery of QUIC/HTTP3 services on other ports.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
the use of Alt-Svc for discovery of HTTP/3 services on other ports.
```

an Initial packet with the Server Hello, a Handshake packet with the rest of
the server's side of the TLS handshake, and initial 1-RTT data, if present.

The Initial Completion datagram contains at least one Handshake packet and
some also include an Initial packet.

Datagrams that contain a QUIC Initial Packet (Client Hello, Server Hello, and
some Initial Completion) must be at least 1200 octets long. This protects

> against amplification attacks and verifies the network path meets minimum

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
against amplification attacks and verifies that the network path meets minimum
```

an Initial packet with the Server Hello, a Handshake packet with the rest of
the server's side of the TLS handshake, and initial 1-RTT data, if present.

The Client Hello datagram, Server Hello datagram, and Initial Completion datagram,

> which all contain a QUIC Initial Packet, must be at least 1200 octets long. This

Reviewer 2: It is possible that the client will not include an Initial packet in its second flight.  Perhaps more importantly, if the client sends a Handshake in the same datagram, it is not required to pad that datagram.

Author: Did we make the Initial ACK formally optional, or are clients just omitting it as an optimization?

Sec 14.1 says "A client MUST expand the payload of all UDP datagrams carrying Initial packets to at least the smallest allowed maximum datagram size of 1200 bytes by adding PADDING frames to the Initial packet or by coalescing the Initial packet" without any qualification about Handshake.

My reading of the text is that it has to be 1200B, whether via PADDING or coalescing up to that point. I understand that there is little point to requiring that padding.

Reviewer 2: Yes, if the client sends an Initial packet, it needs to be padded.  That's pretty clear.  My point is that it might not send it and so not cause that rule to apply.

Let's say that the client does send an Initial ACK before it discards keys.  That is lost.  It doesn't retransmit it because the keys are gone.  The observer won't see that; they only see the Handshake+ packet that is sent later.

And if the client does discard keys too soon, the protocol doesn't stop working and no rules have been broken.

I'm just asking that you be a little more careful and maybe say that a handshake will look like this *in most cases*.  There are too many ways this could be wrong and you used "must".

Author: OK, rewrote it, PTAL

## Version Negotiation and Greasing {#version}

> Version negotiation packets are not intrinsically protected, but QUIC versions

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Version Negotiation packets are not intrinsically protected, but QUIC versions
```

can use later encrypted messages to verify that they were authentic.
Therefore any manipulation of this list will be detected and will cause the

> endpoints to terminate the connection.

Reviewer 2: Not sure if this is the reaction is correct.  "The connection" isn't a notion that makes sense when VN is involved because there are multiple connection attempts involved: one that elicited the VN, and one that used the VN.  Neither will result in a connection being established if there was tampering.

Maybe "might terminate the connection attempt".

## Version Negotiation and Greasing {#version}

Version Negotiation packets are not intrinsically protected, but QUIC versions
can use later encrypted messages to verify that they were authentic.

> Therefore any manipulation of this list will be detected and will cause the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Therefore any manipulation of this list will be detected and may cause the
```
as we don't know what future version will do...

UDP-based protocols other than those that this static bit is meant to allow
multiplexing with. Second, this feature of the wire image is not invariant
{{QUIC-INVARIANTS}} and may change in future versions of the protocol, or

> even be negotiated during the handshake via proposed transport parameters.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
even be negotiated during the handshake via the use of transport parameters.
```

## Connection confirmation {#sec-confirm}

> Connection establishment uses Initial and Handshake packets containing a

Reviewer 2: It really does include Retry.  Though those don't include TLS handshake messages.

TLS handshake. Connection establishment can therefore be detected using

> heuristics similar to those used to detect TLS over TCP. A client initiating

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
heuristics similar to those used to detect TLS over TCP. A client initiating a
```

0-RTT connection may also send data packets in 0-RTT Protected packets directly
after the Initial packet containing the TLS Client Hello. Since these packets

> may be reordered in the network, note that 0-RTT Protected data packets may be

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
may be reordered in the network, 0-RTT Protected data packets could be
```

## Connection confirmation {#sec-confirm}

Connection establishment uses Initial and Handshake packets containing a
TLS handshake, and Retry packets that do not contain parts of the handshake.
Connection establishment can therefore be detected using heuristics similar to
those used to detect TLS over TCP. A client initiating a 0-RTT connection may
also send data packets in 0-RTT Protected packets directly after the Initial
packet containing the TLS Client Hello. Since these packets may be reordered in
the network, 0-RTT Protected data packets could be seen before the Initial
packet.

Note that clients send Initial packets before servers do, servers send Handshake
packets before clients do, and only clients send Initial packets with tokens.

> Therefore, identity as a client or server can generally be confirmed by an on-

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Therefore, the role as a client or server can generally be confirmed by an on-
```

the connection ID is indicated in the 6th byte of the header followed by the
connection ID itself.

To determine the end of the header and find the start of the payload,
the packet number length, the source connection ID length, and the token
length need to be extracted. The packet number length is defined by the seventh
and eight bits of the header as described in section 17.2. of
{{QUIC-TRANSPORT}}, but is obfuscated as described in {{QUIC-TLS}}. The source
connection ID length is specified in the byte after the destination connection
ID. And the token length, which follows the source connection ID, is a variable

> length integer as specified in section 16 of {{QUIC-TRANSPORT}}.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
length integer as specified in Section 16 of {{QUIC-TRANSPORT}}.
```

After decryption, the Initial Client packet can be parsed to detect the
CRYPTO frame that contains the TLS Client Hello, which then can be parsed
similarly to TLS over TCP connections. The Initial client packet may
contain other frames, so the first bytes of each frame need to be checked to
identify the frame type, and if needed skip over it. Note that the length of the
frames is dependent on the frame type. In QUIC version 1, the packet is
expected to only carry the CRYPTO frame and optionally padding frames. However,
PADDING frames, which are each one byte of zeros, may also occur before or after
the CRYPTO frame.

> Note that client Initial packets that do not contain the Client Hello message

Reviewer 2: I read this at first and thought "wat?", but I think that you just have an extra negation here:

```suggestion
Note that client Initial packets that contain the Client Hello message
```

Author: What I'm trying to refer to here is the Initial ACK. Observers should expect that a stateless DPI will like fail to decrypt ~50% of client Initial packets. I think this proposed change inverts the meaning?

Reviewer 2: ACK.  I just misread this.  The double-negation caught me out.  I think that you might want to try to work on this.  Maybe "client Initial packets other than those in the very first flight sent by the client"

It's got nothing to do with the ClientHello, it's whether the client has seen packets from the server yet.

> generally also do not always use the Destination Connection ID that was used to

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
do not always use the Destination Connection ID that was used to
```

timers or through least-recently-used eviction, depending on application
requirements.

{{?RFC4787}} recommends a 2 minute timeout interval for UDP. However,

> timers are often lower, in the range of 15 to 30 seconds. In contrast,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
timers can be lower, in the range of 15 to 30 seconds. In contrast,
```

Reviewer: I think "often" is correct here but fine...
